---
title           : "The third act: agency and transformation"
date            : 2026-06-30
slug            : "three-act-structure-agency-transformation"  # slug (URL segment) for this post
draft           : true
description     : "The three act structure: act three needs character agency and transformation"
summary         : "Unknown origin: In act one, chase your character up a tree. In act two, throw stones at them. In act three..."
keywords        : ["story structure", "three act structure", "character"]
tags            : ["structure", "character", "writing"]

# params:
#  neso:
#    show_toc   : false  # show the table of contents
#    cover:     # cover image settings (remove this whole block if you have no cover)
#      image    : "<cover image URL>"  # just put the filename if the cover lives in the same bundle as the md
#      caption  : "<cover caption>"    # optional; shown under the cover image
#      alt_text : "<cover alt text>"   # optional; accessibility text
---

[Unknown origin](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2015/09/05/up-tree/):

    In act one, chase your character up a tree.
    In act two, throw stones at them.
    In act three, get them back down.

This is an elegant analogy that I learned when I first started studying the three act structure. And yet it's wrong. Specifically, the description of the third act.

## Agency

First, "*get them back down*". With that wording, *deus ex machina* is acceptable. Or a completely passive protagonist that cowers in a corner as other characters save them.

They need to find their own way down from the tree.

## Transformation

    In act one, chase your character up a tree.

    In act two, throw stones at them.

    In act three, the character undergoes a *permanent* and *fundamental* change.
    It is this change that allows them to get themselves down from the tree.

I'm not certain where I read this, or who to attribute it to. I did find [this tweet from @storyandplot](https://x.com/storyandplot/status/1881000772617318757) that carries the same message.

This change is essential in dramatic character arcs.

## Resolution

The analogy assumes getting down from the tree is the end state of the story. But:

- in their transformation, the character could sprout wings and fly to their cliffside aerie.
- the character could form a community with others trapped in the trees. Together they build a treetop civilization that spans the canopy of the great forest.
- the character rallies the others trapped in the trees, and wages war with the evil stone throwers.
- the character realizes they have committed unspeakable, unforgivable acts of betrayal against the antagonist. They accept their death by stoning.
